Add ADR-0047: GitOps Onboarding Redesign (#240)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/0047-gitops-onboarding-redesign.md

# 47. GitOps Onboarding Redesign

Date: 2025-07-09

## Status

Proposed

## Context

Currently, Konflux offers two distinct onboarding paths that create friction and complexity for developers:

### UI Onboarding
- Very easy to use with good validation and feedback
- Handles secrets, build config, environments through web interface
- Provides immediate feedback but doesn't align with GitOps principles

### GitOps Onboarding
- Requires manually authoring YAML across multiple files
- Validation happens during GitLab CI runs, creating tension between Konflux and GitLab CI workflows
- Secrets must still be created via UI, breaking the GitOps flow
- Onboarding is slow and often requires multiple failed PRs to converge due to trial-and-error approach

### Current Pain Points
1. **Fragmented experience**: Developers must context-switch between UI and GitOps approaches

> 2. **Validation delays**: Schema validation only occurs during CI runs, not locally

Reviewer: This isn't true of the existing RH gitops repo. Run `tox` (or write a VSCode plugin to run `tox`).

Author: I have done that, and it resulted in merge conflict hell - I think its been improved since, but having a monorepo makes merge conflicts much more likely than distributed individual repos

Reviewer: Update the pain points to reflect that. That's not what the bullet says.

3. **Error-prone process**: Manual YAML authoring leads to frequent failures
4. **Secrets inconsistency**: Secrets cannot be managed declaratively through Git
5. **Monorepo complexity**: Current GitOps monorepo for tenant configuration creates CODEOWNERS management overhead
6. **UI improvement limitations**: Despite continuous improvements to the UI, many users still choose GitOps onboarding for its inherent disaster recovery and change management benefits, leaving them unable to benefit from UI enhancements

## Decision

Redesign the onboarding experience to converge UI and GitOps into a single coherent, Git-centric flow through the following architectural changes:

> ### Alternative Approaches Considered

Author: done

> **Improving the existing UI** was considered but rejected because:

Reviewer 2: Yes, that was something what I was imagining. Not sure how it would look like, but you would do changes in some configurator and then hit commit and it would create or update a PR to your GitOps repository.

- Despite continuous UI improvements, many users still choose GitOps onboarding for its inherent disaster recovery and change management benefits
- UI enhancements don't address the fundamental issue of maintaining two separate onboarding flows
- Users who prefer GitOps principles cannot benefit from UI improvements, creating a permanent split in the user experience

**Chosen approach** replaces both current flows with a unified Git-centric solution that preserves GitOps benefits while providing the usability improvements users expect.

### Core Shift

> - **Replace UI configuration** with a VS Code plugin for onboarding and editing

Reviewer: Is this meant to be _in place of_ a CI flow for validation?

Author: no, but its meant to ensure that commits will pass CI in all but the rarest of circumstances

- **Use local schema validation**, linting, and previews to reduce onboarding errors

> - **Use Git as the single source of truth** for applications, components and secrets

Reviewer: What about integration test scenarios and releaseplans?

Perhaps just say "tenant resources".

Author: It probably also makes sense to move that to the gitops based approach.

- **Preserve the UI for read-only activities** for monitoring, logs, build inspection, and metrics
- **Commit to single onboarding flow**: UI-based onboarding will be completely deprecated with no fallback option to minimize maintenance overhead and deliver optimal user outcomes

### IDE Selection Rationale
VS Code was chosen as the primary IDE target because:
- **Wide adoption**: VS Code is extensively used across development teams
- **Robust plugin ecosystem**: Provides comprehensive APIs for linting, schema validation, and custom tooling
- **Advanced visualization capabilities**: Plugin system supports rich visualizations and can run full, sandboxed React-based applications within webview windows
- **Extensibility**: Enables building sophisticated onboarding wizards and configuration interfaces directly within the familiar IDE environment

### Component Architecture

| Component | Role |
|-----------|------|
| VS Code Plugin | Main interface for onboarding and configuration |
| Git Repos | Source of truth for Konflux config |
| Vault | Preferred secrets backend |
| Kubernetes Secrets | Alternative backend for secrets |

> | External Secrets Operator (ESO) | Delivery of secrets to Kubernetes |

Author: No, if you use kubernetes secrets, no gitops for you. The biggest downside of this IMO is that you lose the disaster revcovery properties of gitops - you can easily restore the gitops repos, but many things will likely be broken without the secrets. We should heavily encourage use of ESO but it is too heavy handed to _require_ it I think.

| Konflux UI | Monitoring and runtime insight only |

> | Fleet Registry | Service discovery and instance metadata for multi-instance deployments |

Author: agree, I removed it

### VS Code Plugin Design

**Core Features:**
- Forms and wizards to scaffold and edit YAML objects
- Built-in schema-aware YAML editor
- Linting and validation against Konflux schemas
- Integration with local secret store session (Vault or Kubernetes)
- Git-aware diff view and PR-ready commit generation
- Optional: preview pipeline graph / dependency resolution

**Secrets UX:**
- Form-based secret creation (with validation, TTLs, metadata)
- Generated secret definitions point to secret store paths via ESO
- Secrets created in the secret store configured for that instance of Konflux

> - Initially supported stores: Vault and Kubernetes Secrets

Reviewer: What is meant by "Kubernetes Secrets" here? Do you mean to use ESO without a SecretStore?

Author: also i dropped everything related to secrets from the ADR - it seems like it is its own topic

- Optional: audit log stored in `.konflux/` for local tracking

**GitOps Flow:**
1. Developer opens repo in VS Code
2. Launches Konflux plugin
3. Uses wizard to configure new component/build
4. Adds secrets as needed via plugin form
5. Plugin generates YAML and commits to Git

> 6. Developer pushes PR

Reviewer: To where?

Author: to their own gitops repo that is registered with soe Konflux instance.

Reviewer: Where/when does that come in? This is the first time it shows up in the numbered list.

> 7. CI runs lightweight schema validation (should pass if plugin was used)

Reviewer: Ah, good - CI isn't going away.

Author: we can give them the tools for CI but we can't enforce it as in my design, the user owns their own repo.

> 

Reviewer 2: I believe that for this proposal to be effective, there has to be a service that reconciles these changes running withing the Konflux.

Saying that Konflux is a GItOps-only/first system and then not providing any build-in GitOps solution would lead to poor and bizarre experience.

> 

Reviewer: Architecturally, is that argo instance located on the shard, on the cluster? (like we do in the fedora instance?)

> 

Reviewer 3: I think that will depend on how much overhead argo brings to syncing and monitoring each gitops repo.

Does it being, or not being, a core service change things? I'd imagine that if it's a core service, it should reside within each cluster.

> 

Author: if gitops is not a core service, then we really aren't introducing a gitops based approach. We're just deprecating the UI and telling people they have to configure Kubernetes themselves. Some might use gitops, some might use kubectl apply. If what we want is for people to use Gitops, then why would we not provide a Gitops instance?

### Multi-Repo GitOps Model

**Tenant Onboarding via Repo Registration:**

> - Konflux will support multiple GitOps repositories, each representing an independent tenant

Reviewer 2: What if your app consists of multiple components in multiple repositories?

Author: that isn't a problem as long as you are building them in a single namespace. if you need to configure N namespaces, you need to bring N gitops repos.

- Each registered GitOps repo is treated as a distinct tenant with its own Kubernetes namespace
- Teams register GitOps repo via VS Code plugin, CLI (`konflux register`), or UI

> - Konflux provisions a new Kubernetes namespace and runs initial validation

Reviewer: Missing detail here. When users issues `konflux register`, what API do they hit?

- Decouples team onboarding and eliminates complex CODEOWNERS management

### Secrets Management Integration

**Core Capability:**
- VS Code plugin enables declarative secrets creation directly from the IDE
- Secrets are managed through Git configuration with secure backend integration
- Generated secret definitions use External Secrets Operator (ESO) to reference backend stores

**Supported Backends:**

> - **Kubernetes Secrets**: Native Kubernetes secret storage

Reviewer: Is "kubernetes secrets" a backend store for ESO?

ESO has "providers". Here's a list: https://external-secrets.io/latest/provider/aws-secrets-manager/

- **Vault**: HashiCorp Vault integration for enhanced security features
- Future backends can be added as needed

**Security Principles:**
- Plugin only creates secrets, does not read or list existing secrets
- All secret operations are scoped and audited
- Optional: CLI fallback (`konflux secrets create`)

### Fleet Awareness

**Multi-Instance Discovery:**

> When a user's organization operates multiple Konflux instances, the VS Code plugin should provide fleet-wide awareness and intelligent instance selection. Fleet metadata is simple metadata with a description of the clusters capabilities and limitations (text), plus an indicator if the cluster has capacity for new tenants namespace. Each Konflux instance should have a complete copy of the fleet metadata.

Reviewer: This seems like it is its own idea. Break this out into a separate ADR to flesh it out.

What's the metadata look like? How does a cluster know if its full? How does each instance get a copy of the fleet metadata? How do instances join the fleet? What defines the fleet? If two instances have different copies of the fleet metadata, how does that get reconciled? Can you get the fleet metadata without otherwise being authorized on a cluster? If not how do you get authorized in the first place?

Reviewer: Besides - this feels like a _generic_ problem. What other fleet management technologies should we look at before building anything new here?

Reviewer 2: I second that fleet management should be its own ADR. I would even go as far and question if we need any idea of a fleet on the cluster level.

  - Security zones and compliance requirements
  - Instance capacity and resource availability
  - Geographic or network proximity
  - Operational policies (e.g., dev/staging/prod instance separation)

**User Experience:**
- Plugin presents a unified view of all available instances
- Provides recommendations for instance selection during tenant onboarding
- Displays instance health, capacity, and policy information
- Enables seamless switching between instances for different projects

**Implementation Considerations:**
- Fleet registry or service discovery mechanism for instance enumeration
- Federated authentication system across instances
- Instance metadata API for capacity and policy information
- Security controls to prevent unauthorized cross-instance access

### CI/Validation Design

- Introduce a Konflux CLI validator (or GitHub Action) for local + CI use
- Validates schema, references, build logic statically
- Same validator embedded in VS Code plugin
- Optional: Plugin lints against live cluster (e.g., available build agents)

### UI Changes

**Preserve:**
- Dashboard
- Build and release logs

> - Live environment status

Reviewer: We deprecated the Environment API a long time ago.

Author: removed

> - Observability / metrics

Reviewer: Are there metrics in the UI?

Author: I hope there will be. Things like DORA metrics, current queue depth, average queue times, etc

5. **UI improvement limitations**: Despite continuous improvements to the UI, many users still choose GitOps onboarding for its inherent disaster recovery and change management benefits, leaving them unable to benefit from UI enhancements

## Decision

Redesign the onboarding experience to converge UI and GitOps into a single coherent, Git-centric flow through the following architectural changes:

### Alternative Approaches Considered

**Improving the existing UI** was considered but rejected because:
- Despite continuous UI improvements, many users still choose GitOps onboarding for its inherent disaster recovery and change management benefits
- UI enhancements don't address the fundamental issue of maintaining two separate onboarding flows
- Users who prefer GitOps principles cannot benefit from UI improvements, creating a permanent split in the user experience

**Chosen approach** replaces both current flows with a unified Git-centric solution that preserves GitOps benefits while providing the usability improvements users expect.

### Core Shift
- **Replace UI configuration** with a VS Code plugin for onboarding and editing

> - **Use local schema validation**, linting, and previews to reduce onboarding errors

Reviewer: This ADR needs a security considerations sections:

* Nothing can ensure that any tenant gitops repo is not full of malicious manifests. Argo configuration needs to be strictly controlled to limit what can be applied to the cluster, and where, from which gitops repo. Brainstorm some specifically bad scenarios in the consequences section - get creative - and discuss how they're mitigated or not.
* Can users see the argo UI? If they can, can they see other tenants' resources? In the monorepo, this is moot because all the resources are there anyways. In the multi-repo model, now it's not clear they should have view rights cross-tenant in the control plane system.
* Can users register a private gitops repo with argo? How does that flow work?

### VS Code Plugin Design

**Core Features:**
- Forms and wizards to scaffold and edit YAML objects
- Built-in schema-aware YAML editor
- Linting and validation against Konflux schemas
- Git-aware diff view and PR-ready commit generation
- Optional: preview pipeline graph / dependency resolution

**GitOps Flow:**
1. Developer opens repo in VS Code
2. Launches Konflux plugin
3. **If first time**: Uses wizard to register repo with Tenant Registration Service (declares namespace name, configures ArgoCD)
4. Uses wizard to configure new component/build
5. Plugin generates YAML and commits to Git
6. Developer pushes PR
7. CI runs lightweight schema validation (should pass if plugin was used)
8. **After merge**: ArgoCD automatically syncs changes to the namespace

### Multi-Repo GitOps Model & Tenant Registration Service

**Tenant Registration Service:**
Konflux will introduce a new **Tenant Registration Service** API that manages the registration and lifecycle of GitOps repositories as first-class tenants.

**Tenant Model:**
- **Tenant Definition**: A tenant is equivalent to a Kubernetes namespace
- **1:1 Mapping**: Each GitOps repository maps to exactly one Kubernetes namespace

> - **Namespace Declaration**: The namespace name is declared within the GitOps repo itself and is immutable after registration

Reviewer 3: Consider the namespace not being part of the GitOps repo. Since the name is immutable, it should reside somewhere where the user doesn't have access to alter it. We could make it so it's managed by some sort of immutable CR, but that seems overkill.

The registration API will already take as input the repo and the namespace name. Its implementation should claim that namespace so it can only be done once, rejecting if it is already claimed. Behind the scenes, that should create, among other things, something like an ArgoCD [Application](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/operator-manual/declarative-setup/#applications). (And probably grant read access to the user for that Application).

If someone wants to register the same GitOps repo but for a different namespace, who cares? All the created resources are scoped to each namespace so there's no collision/conflict. Is that a naive approach?

Author: yeah, this idea has evolved a little bit. I agree that the name being in the repo when it is immutable is wrong. In the mocks, it is part of the registration process. That seems right, and leads me to believe the namespace name should be a parameter to the registration API and _not_ in the gitops repo itself. I will make the update.

## Decision

Redesign the onboarding experience to converge UI and GitOps into a single coherent, Git-centric flow through the following architectural changes:

### Alternative Approaches Considered

**Improving the existing UI** was considered but rejected because:
- Despite continuous UI improvements, many users still choose GitOps onboarding for its inherent disaster recovery and change management benefits
- UI enhancements don't address the fundamental issue of maintaining two separate onboarding flows
- Users who prefer GitOps principles cannot benefit from UI improvements, creating a permanent split in the user experience

**Chosen approach** replaces both current flows with a unified Git-centric solution that preserves GitOps benefits while providing the usability improvements users expect.

### Core Shift
- **Replace UI configuration** with a VS Code plugin for onboarding and editing
- **Use local schema validation**, linting, and previews to reduce onboarding errors

> - **Use Git as the single source of truth** for applications, components, integration test scenarios, releasePlans and RBAC

Reviewer 4: We should use ArgoCD projects for limiting what tenants can deploy to their namespace (like we do today).

> # 47. GitOps Onboarding Redesign

Reviewer 5: @brianwcook do you mind letting #236 keep the 47 number?

## Decision

Redesign the onboarding experience to converge UI and GitOps into a single coherent, Git-centric flow through the following architectural changes:

### Alternative Approaches Considered

**Improving the existing UI** was considered but rejected because:
- Despite continuous UI improvements, many users still choose GitOps onboarding for its inherent disaster recovery and change management benefits
- UI enhancements don't address the fundamental issue of maintaining two separate onboarding flows
- Users who prefer GitOps principles cannot benefit from UI improvements, creating a permanent split in the user experience
- Konflux needs a strong disaster recovery story and having Gitops-based tenant configuration is a significant advantage there.

**Chosen approach** replaces both current flows with a unified Git-centric solution that preserves GitOps benefits while providing the usability improvements users expect.

### Core Shift
- **Deprecate ability to configure tenant resources via the UI** Users will configure resources directly via Kubernetes or via Gitops

> - **Promot use of Git as the single source of truth** for applications, components, integration test scenarios, releasePlans and RBAC in production environments

Author: I don't understand the question. We will have a list of allowed objects for argoCD to sync. It should be the intersection of what konflux-admin is allowed to create + objects which are long lived (e.g., it won't include "snapshot" or any other objects which are garbage collected)

- **Preserve the UI for non-configuration activities** including:
  - Monitoring and observability: logs, build inspection, viewing metrics, dashboards

>   - Operational actions: triggering builds/tests, starting manual releases, pipeline management

Author: such as manually starting a pipeline run.

  - Any other runtime actions that don't involve declarative resource configuration
- **Commit to single onboarding flow**: UI-based onboarding will be completely deprecated with no fallback option to minimize maintenance overhead and deliver optimal user outcomes

> - **Maintain ease of use and excellent user experience** by providing aVS Code plugin that delivers forms based configuration of validation of tenant resources

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **Maintain ease of use and excellent user experience** by providing a VS Code plugin that delivers forms based configuration of validation of tenant resources
```

### IDE Selection Rationale

> VS Code was chosen as the primary IDE target because:

Reviewer 6: My 2 cents, just random thoughts:

It might be a popular text editor, but by moving the onboarding UI into a VS code plugin effectively creates barriers for users who do not use VS code, doesn't it? A web UI would be more accessible in my opinion. I wouldn't expect any other commercial build system to force me to use VS code with their provided plugin(s). A CLI tool to help and validate the config yes, that would be nice. An optional VS code plugin for those who use that editor yes. But to remove the UI in favor of gitops and then use the plugin as a band aid doesn't seem very user oriented to me. If the onboarding experience is not ideal today, I would rather focus on why that is.

I'd like to suggest what has already been said in previous comments. Make a good UI, click on a button to open a PR in the user repo (the facilities should already exist for the pipeline-as-code PRs) and let the user review the config there.

What I am not seeing in this ADR is how do you help users without VS code? Do they just use the CI validation? That's fine I guess, but then, why duplicate the code in CI and the plugin while restricting the user base? Again, I'm not opposed to the idea of a plugin, but in my opinion it should be only treated as an optional - perhaps community developed - helper tool, while the web UI should be improved upon.

I also don't really agree with the early statement that the UI is

> Very easy to use with good validation and feedback

onboarding to Konflux has been pretty difficult for me, especially the first time. Compared to other (commercial) systems I think Konflux should focus on the UI way more than now, but this ADR IIUC goes in the opposite direction - which I don't really understand.

Reviewer 7: I agree that Konflux UI would better suit than an IDE plugin.

- **Wide adoption**: VS Code is extensively used across development teams
- **Robust plugin ecosystem**: Provides comprehensive APIs for linting, schema validation, and custom tooling
- **Advanced visualization capabilities**: Plugin system supports rich visualizations and can run full, sandboxed React-based applications within webview windows
- **Extensibility**: Enables building sophisticated onboarding wizards and configuration interfaces directly within the familiar IDE environment

### Component Architecture

| Component | Role | Optional |
|-----------|------|----------|
| VS Code Plugin | Main interface for onboarding and configuration | No |
| Git Repos | Source of truth for Konflux config | No |
| GitOps Registration Service | API for automated registration of GitOps repos as tenants | **Yes** (recommended) |

> | ArgoCD Service | Continuous GitOps sync and deployment | **Yes** (recommended) |

Author: I'm sure someone could replace argocd with flux, but we are going to support argo

| Konflux UI | Monitoring, runtime insights, and operational actions (non-configuration) | No |

### VS Code Plugin Design

**Core Features:**
- Forms and wizards to scaffold and edit YAML objects
- Built-in schema-aware YAML editor
- Linting and validation against Konflux schemas
- Git-aware diff view and PR-ready commit generation
- Optional: preview pipeline graph / dependency resolution

**GitOps Flow:**

> 1. Developer creates an empty git repo with Github, Gitlab, etc.

Author: I suppose both of these are possible but we should enhance the default PAC on-cel expressions to not trigger pipeline runs on changes to argocd manifests.

the reason I think this is sub-optimal is that the only time it really makes sense is if the user is using a single monorepo with the namespace. otherwise, the argocd manifests are un-naturally colocataed with a single components repo.

4. **If first time**: Uses wizard to register repo with Tenant Registration Service (declares namespace name, configures ArgoCD)
5. Developer is prompted by UI to install / open repo in VS Code
3. Launches Konflux plugin and uses it to configure new components, tests, releasePlans
6. Plugin generates YAML objects in repo
7. Developer commits and pushes code (optionally via PR, with CI,reviews etc.)
9. ArgoCD automatically syncs merged changes to the namespace

### Multi-Repo GitOps Model & Optional Services

**GitOps Registration Service (Optional):**

> Konflux will optionally provide a **GitOps Registration Service** API that automates the registration and lifecycle of GitOps repositories as first-class tenants. This service is recommended for production deployments but not required for basic Konflux functionality.

Reviewer 4: What is the meaning of registration without running argo as part of konflux?

Author: both the registration server _and_ argo are optional, but the assumption is if you choose to run registration service, you would also run Argo.
The point is you don't need either one to run a minimal, functioning konflux

Reviewer 5: Is the proposed registration service basically doing what an ArgoCD repo with an app-of-apps in it would do? 

In other words, wouldn't we want to have GitOps for the registration as well?

Perhaps we want to automate away the registration by defining some heuristics to allow for automated detection of GitOps repos?

**ArgoCD Service (Optional):**
ArgoCD can be optionally deployed as a continuous GitOps synchronization service. While recommended for production use, Konflux can operate without ArgoCD, though this results in reduced automation and requires manual synchronization of GitOps repositories.

**Impact of Optional Services:**
- **With both services**: Full automated GitOps experience with continuous deployment and streamlined onboarding
- **Without both services**: Konflux remains fully functional but requires manual GitOps repository setup and synchronization. This configuration provides:
  - Smaller deployment footprint suitable for lower-spec machines
  - Simplified setup for testing and development environments  
  - Reduced operational complexity for teams preferring manual control
  - Degraded user experience with manual setup steps
  - Reduced disaster recovery capabilities due to lack of automated drift detection

**Tenant Model:**
- **Tenant Definition**: A tenant is equivalent to a Kubernetes namespace

> - **1:1 Mapping**: Each GitOps repository maps to exactly one Kubernetes namespace

Reviewer 4: Why this limitation is needed?

Author: I like it, its clean and easy to understand / enforce and we have long said that namespaces are the logical team boundaries for Konflux. It fits our model.

- **Namespace Declaration**: The namespace name is a parameter to the registration service. Once the repo is registered, the namespace it is immutable.

> - **Registration Immutability**: Re-registering the same repo is rejected to prevent namespace conflicts

Author: If i try to register my repo to as a new namespace "foo" but foo already exists, it will return 409 error.
If I try to register my repo to an _existing namespace_ (different API endpoint) it checks to make sure I am an admin in the target namespace.

**Resource Scope:**

> - **Multi-Resource Support**: One GitOps repo can contain multiple applications, components, integrationTestScenarios, and releasePlans

Reviewer 4: So maybe mention that those are just examples?

- **Single Namespace Constraint**: All resources from a GitOps repo deploy to its designated namespace only

> - **No Cross-Namespace Interaction**: Changes affecting N namespaces require changes in N separate GitOps repos

Reviewer 4: I don't think we need this limitation. I can imagine that some teams would want to manage multiple namespaces from the same gitops repo.

**Registration Process (when using optional services):**
1. Team registers GitOps repo via VS Code plugin, CLI (`konflux register`), or UI
2. at registration time the desired namespace name is provided to (UI | API)

> 3. GitOps Registration Service validates the repo and the requested namespace

Author: i've provided for a way to turn off new registrations already when a cluster is at capacity

4. Service provisions the new requested Kubernetes namespace

> 6. Service configures ArgoCD to monitor the repo for continuous deployment

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure an additional service is needed to configure argo. Why not creating argo resources directly?

Author: Who's going to create it?

Reviewer 4: The UI can also create the ArgoCD applications directly through the k8s api.

Author: yeah, you aren't the only one to bring it up. I am updating the relationship for gitops repo to namespace to be 1:many

        
        NS["🎯 Namespace: team-prod<br/>(declared in repo)"]
        
        ArgoCD["🔄 ArgoCD Service<br/>(Optional)<br/>• Continuous sync<br/>• Propagates changes<br/>• Monitors repo"]
    end
    
    Repo -.->|"One-time registration<br/>(if using optional services)"| GRS
    GRS -.->|"Creates"| NS
    GRS -.->|"Configures (if available)"| ArgoCD
    
    Repo -->|"Continuous sync<br/>(if ArgoCD available)"| ArgoCD
    ArgoCD -->|"Deploys resources"| NS
    
    classDef repoStyle fill:#1976d2,stroke:#0d47a1,stroke-width:2px,color:#fff
    classDef nsStyle fill:#7b1fa2,stroke:#4a148c,stroke-width:2px,color:#fff
    classDef optionalServiceStyle fill:#f57c00,stroke:#e65100,stroke-width:2px,color:#fff,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    
    class Repo repoStyle
    class NS nsStyle
    class GRS optionalServiceStyle
    class ArgoCD optionalServiceStyle
```

**Key Relationships:**
- **Optional Registration**: GitOps Registration Service (when available) is used once per repo to create namespace and configure ArgoCD
- **Optional Continuous Sync**: ArgoCD (when available) continuously propagates changes from repo to namespace

> - **Manual Alternative**: Without optional services, teams manually manage namespace creation and GitOps synchronization

Author: I don't think we need humans in the way of creating namespace on clusters with adequate capacity. At _most_ we need a simple approval process, but I do not like the current process.

> - **Manual Alternative**: Without optional services, teams manually manage namespace creation and GitOps synchronization

Reviewer 4: How would you ensure that people don't create namespaces for their own use and by that fill up the cluster capacity?

- **1:1 Mapping**: Each GitOps repo maps to exactly one namespace
- **Immutable Names**: Namespace names are declared in the repo and cannot change
- **Single Deployment Target**: All resources from one repo deploy to one namespace
- **No Cross-Namespace Resources**: Each team's resources are isolated within their own namespace

### CI/Validation Design

- Introduce a Konflux CLI validator (or GitHub Action) for local + CI use
- Validates schema, references, build logic statically
- Same validator embedded in VS Code plugin
- Optional: Plugin lints against live cluster (e.g., available build agents)

### UI Changes

**Preserve:**
- Dashboard
- Build and release logs
- Operational actions: triggering builds/tests, starting manual releases, pipeline management

**Remove/Demote:**

> - UI forms for configuring components, applications, and other declarative resources

Author: agree, I would like to keep that exact experience on the gitops registration page

7. **Resource Efficiency**: Minimal footprint option suitable for lower-spec machines and testing environments
8. **Optional GitOps Automation**: When ArgoCD is deployed, provides industry-standard continuous deployment with automatic drift detection and reconciliation
9. **Maintained GitOps Benefits**: Preserves disaster recovery, change history, and automation capabilities (enhanced with optional services)

### Negative Consequences

1. **Tool Dependency**: Requires VS Code and plugin installation for optimal experience
2. **Learning Curve**: Developers must adapt to new plugin-based workflow
3. **Development Overhead**: Requires building and maintaining VS Code plugin and optional services
4. **Manual Operations**: Without optional services, teams must manually manage GitOps operations, reducing automation benefits
5. **Migration Complexity**: Existing users must migrate from current UI/GitOps hybrid approach
6. **Configuration Complexity**: Teams must choose between manual setup (simple but limited) vs. optional services (full-featured but more complex)

> 

Reviewer 7: Currently, some controllers use spec and annotations to communicate. For example, when one creates ImageRepository, there could be annotation that define for which Component this IR is created and operator automatically updates the required Component fields.
Another example with Image Controller is credentials rotation. A user needs to set a spec field to `true` and when the operator refresh the tokens, the field is returned to `false`. Will this play well with pure GitOps approach?

## Security Implications

A critical security consideration in any GitOps implementation is ensuring that the GitOps sync process cannot create arbitrary resources beyond what a namespace administrator would normally be permitted to create. Without proper constraints, GitOps operators could potentially be exploited to escalate privileges or deploy unauthorized resources.

### Security Mitigation Approaches

**ArgoCD Application Sync Using Impersonation:**
ArgoCD impersonation allows GitOps sync operations to use dedicated, limited-privilege service accounts per namespace rather than the highly privileged control plane service account. This ensures that sync operations can only create resources that a namespace administrator would normally be allowed to create, providing strong tenant isolation through the principle of least privilege.

> 

Author: added
